# Allegheny-County-Employee-Salary-analysis

## Project Overview
The goal of this project is to analyze the annual salary and pay data for employees under the County Executive and independently elected County officials. The dataset spans from 2016 to the present and is updated twice per year, with files available for December and June. The dataset includes information on annual salary, regular pay, incentive pay, and gross pay for the employees.

## Questions for the Analysis (Ask phase)
Research Questions:
The project aims to answer several research questions, such as:

* What is the average salary for County Executive and independently elected County officials?
* Which position has the highest salary and how has the salary changed over time?
* What is the distribution of salaries across different positions?
* Are there any gender or racial disparities in salary?
* What are the proportions of regular pay, incentive pay, and gross pay in the overall pay structure?


## Preparing the Data (Prepare Phase)
### Data
The dataset is an open dataset generated by Allegheny County between 2016-2022 and it includes 7 csv files, source from www.data.gov
#### Importing the dataset
Succesfully downloaded and Imported the dataset to sheets then VIEW, CLEAN,and ORGANIZE the data.
## Cleaning the dataset (Process Phase)
During the data analysis process, duplicates were identified and removed from the dataset, resulting in 6 duplicate rows being eliminated. The dataset now consists of 6,274 unique rows, ensuring data integrity and accuracy.

To enhance the quality of the dataset, duplicate columns, specifically "Names" and "Date Started," were identified and eliminated from the analysis. This step ensures a streamlined and efficient dataset, focused on relevant information.

Through thorough examination, it was determined that there are currently 5,011 active employees within the dataset (females: 2,397 & males: 2,614). Additionally, 1,263 records indicate termination or are left blank, signifying either former employees or missing data points.

## Summarizing the dataset (Analyze Phase)
Now that all the data is stored appropriately and has been prepared for analysis, I can start putting it to work;

* In the analysis of salaries within the dataset, it was determined that the average salary for the County Executive position is $142,339.18. This average is consistent with the actual salary for the County Executive, as there is only one individual occupying this role.
On the other hand, there are five independently elected county officials within the dataset. To calculate their average annual salary, the individual salaries were summed and divided by the number of officials using the AVERAGE fuction. The sum of the annual salaries for these officials is as follows: (196119.04 + 113406.80 + 142339.18 + 113407.84 + 113406.80 + )/5 = $135,735.93

* The director in the 'health' department has the highest salary by sorting the annual salary from Z-A =($269,250.18)
* Based on the provided information, the starting salary was $250,000, and the salary as of 2022 increased to $269,250. To determine the percentage increase in salary over the given time period, we can follow the calculation steps.
Subtract the starting salary from the final salary:
Salary Increase = Final Salary - Starting Salary
Salary Increase = $269,250 - $250,000
Salary Increase = $19,250
Calculate the percentage increase by dividing the salary increase by the starting salary and multiplying by 100:
Percentage Salary Increase = (Salary Increase / Starting Salary) * 100
Percentage Salary Increase = ($19,250 / $250,000) * 100
Percentage Salary Increase = 0.077 * 100
Percentage Salary Increase = 7.7%

* During the analysis of salaries across different positions, it was observed that the distribution of income is uneven. This conclusion was drawn by sorting and filtering the dataset based on the positions held by employees.
Upon examining the dataset, it becomes evident that there is significant variability in salaries across different positions. The observed disparities highlight the varying levels of responsibility, expertise, and experience associated with each role.

* During the comprehensive analysis of the dataset, it was determined that there are no significant gender or racial disparities in salary. However, it was observed that the representation of American Indian/Alaskan Native individuals in the workforce is relatively lower compared to other ethnic groups.
In terms of salary, no significant variations were found based on gender or race. This suggests that compensation within the dataset is equitable, irrespective of these factors. It is crucial to note that fair and unbiased compensation practices contribute to an inclusive and diverse work environment.
However, the analysis identified a potential underrepresentation of American Indian/Alaskan Native individuals in the dataset. This finding may indicate a need to explore strategies for promoting diversity and inclusion within the organization. Creating an inclusive environment that embraces individuals from all backgrounds fosters innovation, different perspectives, and a richer work culture.

* The calculation for the proportion of employees receiving incentive pay is as follows:
Proportion of employees receiving incentive pay = (Number of employees receiving incentive pay / Total number of employees) * 100.
Proportion of employees receiving incentive pay = (3,014 / 5,011) * 100.
Proportion of employees receiving incentive pay = 60.1%. The analysis indicates that approximately 60.1% of employees within the dataset are receiving incentive pay. This proportion highlights the prevalence of incentive-based compensation among the workforce. Incentive pay programs can motivate and reward employees for exceptional performance, driving productivity and enhancing overall job satisfaction.
 
 * The calculation for the proportion of employees receiving gross pay is as follows:
Proportion of employees receiving gross pay = (Number of employees receiving gross pay / Total number of employees) * 100.
Proportion of employees receiving gross pay = (5,011 / 5,011) * 100.
Proportion of employees receiving gross pay = 100%. The analysis indicates that 100% of employees within the dataset are receiving gross pay. This finding implies that every employee in the dataset receives some form of compensation, reflecting the completeness of the data and the coverage of employee salaries.
 
 * The calculation for the proportion of employees receiving overtime pay is as follows:
Proportion of employees receiving overtime pay = (Number of employees receiving overtime pay / Total number of employees) * 100.
Proportion of employees receiving overtime pay = (3,534 / 5,011) * 100.
Proportion of employees receiving overtime pay = 70.5%. The analysis reveals that approximately 70.5% of employees within the dataset receive overtime pay. This proportion signifies the prevalence of overtime work and the additional compensation provided to employees for their extra hours.
 
 ### Additional findings:
 * To calculate the mean of salaries, the average function can be used. In this case, the average is calculated for the range of salaries from cell K2 to K6275. The formula used is as follows:
Mean Salary = AVERAGE(K2:K6275)
The mean salary is calculated using the average function, which provides a measure of central tendency for the salaries in the dataset. By averaging the values within the specified range (from cell K2 to K6275), the mean salary is obtained as $55,962.51

* To calculate the median of salaries, the median function is used. In this case, the median is calculated for the range of salaries from cell K2 to K6275. The formula used is as follows:
Median Salary = MEDIAN(K2:K6275) = $50,537.55

* To calculate the range of salaries, the difference between the highest and lowest values within the specified range is determined. In this case, the range is calculated for the range of salaries from cell K2 to K6275.
The formula used to calculate the salary range is as follows:
Salary Range = MAX(K2:K6275) - MIN(K2:K6275)= (269,250.18 - 5,666.96) = $263,583.22

## Data visualization (Share Phases)
* To find Salary Distributions, i used Rstudio (R programming language) to visualize my data.
* After loading my packages: library (tidyverse),(lubridate),(dplyr),(ggplot2),(readr),(tidyr),(here),(skimr),(janitor).
* I imported my clean data to Rstudio with this code: library(readr)
Allegheny_County_Employee_Salaries_Allegheny_County_Employee_Salaries_2022_1_ <- read_csv("Allegheny County Employee Salaries - Allegheny County Employee Salaries 2022 (1).csv")
* Then changed the variable to salaries <- "Allegheny County Employee Salaries - Allegheny County Employee Salaries 2022 (1).csv"
* To visualize the salary distribution:
* ggplot(salaries)+
* geom_histogram(mapping=aes(x= annual_salary)+
* labs(title= "salary distributions")+
* xlab("salary")+
* ylab("count")
* 



 
